--- PAGE 1 --- 
 
Matthew Poston 
County Attorney 
Matthew.Poston@LibertyCounty
CAO.com 
1923 SAM HOUSTON ST.  
STE. 202, LIBERTY, TX 77575  
P: 936.336.4650 
F: 936.336.4658 
Augus
t 13, 2020 
The Honor
able Ken Paxton 
Attorney General of the State of Texas 
Att
ention: Opinion Committee 
via email to: opinion.committee@oag.texas.gov 
RE:  
Application of the nepotism prohibition to the employment by one county 
commissioner of a prohibited relative of another commissioner in an ex officio road commissioner 
county. 
Dear
 Attorney General Paxton, 
I am
 writing this letter to request from your office your opinion about whether the nepotism 
statute, found in Chapter 573 of the Government Code, would be violated by the employment of a 
county commissioner’s prohibited relative by another county commissioner in a county that 
administers its roads pursuant to Subchapter A of Chapter 252 of the Transportation Code.   This 
request turns on interpreting two attorney general opinions, JM-801 (1987) and DM-158 (1992).  
Specifically, because DM-158 overrules to the extent of conflict JM-801, can it be said that JM-801’s 
application of the nepotism statute no longer applies? 
The nepotism prohibition relevant here is: 
A public official may not appoint, confirm the appointment of, or vote for the 
appointment or confirmation of the appointment of an individual to a position that is to be 
directly or indirectly compensated from public funds or fees of office if: 
(1) the individual is related to a public official within a degree described by
Section 573.002; or 
(2) the public official holds the appointment or confirmation authority as a
member of a state or local board, the legislature, or a court and the individual is related to 
another member of that board, legislature, or court within a degree described by Section 
573.002.   
Tex. Gov. Code §573.041.  
Under the facts presented in this request, subsection (1) would not apply, as the hired 
individual has no relationship with the hiring commissioner.  Subsection (2), on the other hand 
would appear to apply.  The commissioner does not possess any hiring authority but for his status as 
a commissioner on commissioners court.  It is impossible to be an ex officio road commissioner but 
for also being a commissioner sitting on commissioners court.  But that explanation seems lacking if 
RQ-0372-KP
FILE# ML-48854-20
I.D.#  48854
--- PAGE 2 --- 
2 
 
no other member of the commissioners court or the court itself does not have the authority to make 
employment decisions for the position in question.  How could it be said that a person exercised an 
authority he has by virtue of his membership on a board if the board itself lacks that authority?   
 Your office has previously addressed a closely related issue in a situation where a county 
judge hired a prohibited relative of a county commissioner.  County judges are members of the 
commissioners court and therefore sit on the same “local board”. See Tex. Loc. Gov. Code 
§81.001(a). Your office determined that in hiring a secretary in his office, the county judge was not 
acting as a member of commissioners court.  Tex. Att’y Gen. Let. Adv. No. 115 (1975).    
 In the context of other local governmental entities, prior opinions of your office have looked 
repeatedly at what entity or person has the hiring authority and whether that authority has been 
sufficiently delegated.  “The right to control, whether exercised or not, was found to be the decisive 
factor in several instances in which this office found the nepotism statute to be applicable.”  Tex. 
Att’y Gen. Op. JM-801, at 3 (1987).  If a home-rule municipality has delegated hiring authority to a 
city manager through its charter, a relative of a city commissioner may be hired by the city manager 
without violating the nepotism prohibition so long as that individual isn’t related to the city manager.  
Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. No. GA-0595 (2008).  But where the city council has kept some oversight by 
way of a revocable ordinance rather than through the city’s charter, or where delegation to a city 
manager is less-than-complete, the same employment would violate nepotism.  Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. 
No. DM-2, at 2 (1991); Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. No. GA-0226, at 5 (2004) (A delegation of authority to 
‘appoint, subject to consultation with” the city council allows city council to retain some authority 
and therefore is insufficient.) 
 School boards, similarly, may delegate “final authority” over “selection of personnel” to 
superintendents.  Tex. Educ. Code §11.163(a)(1).  If that authority is delegated by the school board, 
then nepotism does not prohibit the hiring by the superintendent of relatives of the school board.  
Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. No. GA-0123 (2003). 
 The facts presented in this request are virtually identical to those presented in 1987 to your 
office.  Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. No. JM-801 (1987).  There, your office concluded that “the 
commissioners court has authority to approve or disapprove the hiring decisions of an ex officio 
road commissioner”.  Id. at 5.  Nepotism would apply, therefore, if a commissioner hired another’s 
son.  Id.  In large part this appears to be based on legislative history and this opinion reasoned that 
while, “The 1981 amendment [to the Road and Bridge Act] was necessary to allow ex officio road 
commissioners to make hiring decisions at all”, “[n]othing in the statutory language or legislative 
history indicates that the 1981 amendment was intended to prevent the commissioners court from 
exercising supervision over the hiring decisions of each individual road commissioner.”  Id. at 4, 5.   
 A subsequent opinion took the opposite view.  Tex. Att’y Gen. Op. No. DM-158 at 4 
(1992).  (“However, we believe that [JM-801] incorrectly concluded that ‘[n]othing in the statutory 
language or the legislative history indicates that the 1981 amendment was intended to prevent the 
commissioners court from exercising supervisions’ over an ex officio road commissioners’ individual 
hiring or firing decisions”.  The opinion concluded that, “Rather, we feel that the statutory language 
and legislative history of the 1981 amendment clearly evidence the legislature’s intent to delegate the 
authority to hire and fire road and bridge employees to the ex officio commissioner, once the 
commissioners court has authorized the employee positions.”  Id.  Other than this, DM-158 does 
--- PAGE 3 --- 
3 
 
not further address the applicability of the nepotism statute in light of that fact, even though it 
would seem that it renders application of nepotism impossible to these facts. 
 In summary, it appears that there is a conflict between prior opinions of this office.  Opinion 
DM-158 appears to nullify the foundation reached by the prior opinion, JM-801, but it stops short 
of nullifying its conclusion.  In the context of an ex officio road system county, does DM-158 render 
application of the nepotism statute impossible to a situation where one commissioner hires the 
prohibited relative of another? 
  I thank you and your office very much for an opinion on this matter.  If you have any 
questions regarding this, just let me know.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Matthew C. Poston 
County Attorney 